README.md, before:

# esp-modbus-mqtt
[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.com/gmasse/esp-modbus-mqtt.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.com/gmasse/esp-modbus-mqtt)

A Modbus RTU (RS-485) to MQTT Gateway (based on ESP32)

## Circuit

Auto-switching UART-to-RS485 converter:
```

                   VCC ---------------+
                                      |
                              +-------x-------+
        (PIN27)    RXD <------| RX            |
                              |      UART    B|----------<> B
        (PIN26)    TXD ------>| TX    TO      |
ESP32                         |     RS-485    |     RS485 bus side
                              |               |
                              |              A|----------<> A
                              |               |
                              +-------x-------+
                                      |
                                     GND
```
Manual switching UART-to-RS485 converter:
```
                   VCC ---------------+
                                      |
                              +-------x-------+
        (PIN27)    RXD <------| R             |
                              |      UART    B|----------<> B
        (PIN26)    TXD ------>| D     TO      |
ESP32                         |     RS-485    |     RS485 bus side
        (PIN25)    RTS --+--->| DE            |
                         |    |              A|----------<> A
                         +----| /RE           |
                              +-------x-------+
                                      |
                                     GND
```
NB: ESP32 pins are configurable at compilation time.

## Modbus

Device acts as Modbus Master, regurlaly polling a list of registers from a Modbus Slave.

List of Modbus parameters (in `platformio.ini` file):
 - `modbus_rxd`: RX/R pin number (default: `27`)
 - `modbus_txd`: TX/D pin number (default: `26`)
 - `modbus_rts`: DE/RE pin number (default: `25`). If you don't need RTS, use `NOT_A_PIN` value.
 - `modbus_baudrate` (default: `9600`)
 - `modbus_unit`: Modbus Slave ID (default: `10`);
 - `modbus_retries`: if a Modbus request fails, number of retries before passing to the next register (default: `2`)
 - `modbus_scanrate`: the device will attempt to poll the slave every XX seconds (default: `30`)

Registers list is defined by the array `registers[]` in `src/modbus_registers.h`.
A very simple example would be:
```
const modbus_register_t registers[] = {
    { 123, MODBUS_TYPE_HOLDING, REGISTER_TYPE_U16, "value_123" },
    { 124, MODBUS_TYPE_HOLDING, REGISTER_TYPE_U16, "value_124" }
};
```
Where:
 - `123` and `124` are register address to read,
 - `MODBUS_TYPE_HOLDING` is the Modbus object type to read,
 - `REGISTER_TYPE_U16` is the expected format of the returned value,
 - `value_123` and `value_124` are the name in the JSON MQTT message

#### Supported Modbus objects:
 - `HOLDING` type is supported and has been tested
 - `INPUT`, `COIL`, `DISCRETE` and `COUNT` has not been tested but should work

#### Supported returned Value:
 - `REGISTER_TYPE_U16`: unsigned 16-bit integer
 - `REGISTER_TYPE_BITFIELD`: a sequence of 16 (or less) single bits; the first item maps the least significant bit
 - `REGISTER_TYPE_DIEMATIC_ONE_DECIMAL`: a specific De-Dietrich signed decimal implementation
 - `REGISTER_TYPE_DEBUG`: hexadecimal value only visible in INFO logs (not sent in MQTT message)
 - other types are not supported (TODO src/modbus_base.cpp:readModbusRegisterToJson)

## MQTT

MQTT parameters are passed through environment variables:
 - `PIO_MQTT_HOST_IP`: MQTT broker IPv4
 - `PIO_MQTT_PORT`: MQTT broker port
 - `PIO_MQTT_TOPIC`: root prefix of the published topic

With `PIO_MQTT_TOPIC=MyTopic`, based on the register list example above, the published MQTT message will be:
```
Topic: MyTopic/ESP-MM-ABCDEF012345/data
Message: {"value_123":0,"value_124":65536}
```
Where `ABCDEF012345` is the ESP unique Chip ID.

## Compilation

```
git clone https://github.com/gmasse/esp-modbus-mqtt.git
cd esp-modbus-mqtt
python3 -m venv venv
pip install -U platformio
hash -r
cp platformio.ini.dist platformio.ini
(edit platformio.ini if needed)
export PIO_FIRMWARE_URL="http://domain.com/firmware.bin"
export PIO_MQTT_HOST_IP=11.22.33.44
export PIO_MQTT_PORT=1883
export PIO_MQTT_TOPIC=mytopic
platformio run
```

Built firmware will be at `.pio/build/fm-devkit/firmware.bin`
You can upload to ESP with: `platformio run upload`

## TODO

- [ ] Configuration (Wifi credentials) Reset
- [ ] Factory Firmware (https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/api-guides/bootloader.html)
- [ ] Secure Boot
- [ ] Moving to ESP-IDF Framework
- [ ] Log level update at runtime

## FAQ
#### Passing environment variables via VS Code
Edit `.vscode/settings.json` and add the following lines:
```
  "terminal.integrated.env.osx": {
    "PIO_FIRMWARE_URL": "https://url/firmware.bin",
    "PIO_MQTT_HOST_IP": "11.22.33.44",
    "PIO_MQTT_PORT": "1883",
    "PIO_MQTT_TOPIC": "mytopic"
  },
```

#### Flashing firmware
```
cp .plateformio/packages/framework-arduinoespressif32/tools/sdk/bin/bootloader_dio_40m.bin .
cp .platformio/packages/framework-arduinoespressif32/tools/partitions/default.bin .

esptool.py --chip esp32 --port /dev/ttyUSB1 --baud 460800 \
 --before default_reset --after hard_reset write_flash -z \
 --flash_mode dio --flash_freq 40m --flash_size detect \
 0x1000 bootloader_dio_40m.bin 0x8000 default.bin 0x10000 firmware.bin
```

Commit message:

added documentation and README changes

README.md, after:

## Introduction
This project is intended to get information from Astral Pool Chlorinators and publish it to mqtt browser, this information can be stores into influxdb or be showed into homeassistant dashboard

Initially the code only permits to read information, in the future i will try to manage some write registers to communicate with the clhorinator.

This code is tested with Astral Pool Chlorinator Smart Next, and could be compatible with other Astral Pool models with built in RS-485 port communication.

## Atral Pool Chlorinator Documentation

Here you can find ./documentation/man_60363_modbus_en-131505.pdf

## Thanks 

This project is based on the @gmasse project https://github.com/gmasse/esp-modbus-mqtt 

# esp-modbus-mqtt
[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.com/gmasse/esp-modbus-mqtt.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.com/gmasse/esp-modbus-mqtt)

A Modbus RTU (RS-485) to MQTT Gateway (based on ESP32)

## Circuit

Auto-switching UART-to-RS485 converter:
```

                   VCC ---------------+
                                      |
                              +-------x-------+
        (PIN27)    RXD <------| RX            |
                              |      UART    B|----------<> B
        (PIN26)    TXD ------>| TX    TO      |
ESP32                         |     RS-485    |     RS485 bus side
                              |               |
                              |              A|----------<> A
                              |               |
                              +-------x-------+
                                      |
                                     GND
```
Manual switching UART-to-RS485 converter:
```
                   VCC ---------------+
                                      |
                              +-------x-------+
        (PIN27)    RXD <------| R             |
                              |      UART    B|----------<> B
        (PIN26)    TXD ------>| D     TO      |
ESP32                         |     RS-485    |     RS485 bus side
        (PIN25)    RTS --+--->| DE            |
                         |    |              A|----------<> A
                         +----| /RE           |
                              +-------x-------+
                                      |
                                     GND
```
NB: ESP32 pins are configurable at compilation time.

## Modbus

Device acts as Modbus Master, regurlaly polling a list of registers from a Modbus Slave.

List of Modbus parameters (in `platformio.ini` file):
 - `modbus_rxd`: RX/R pin number (default: `27`)
 - `modbus_txd`: TX/D pin number (default: `26`)
 - `modbus_rts`: DE/RE pin number (default: `25`). If you don't need RTS, use `NOT_A_PIN` value.
 - `modbus_baudrate` (default: `9600`)
 - `modbus_unit`: Modbus Slave ID (default: `10`);
 - `modbus_retries`: if a Modbus request fails, number of retries before passing to the next register (default: `2`)
 - `modbus_scanrate`: the device will attempt to poll the slave every XX seconds (default: `30`)

Registers list is defined by the array `registers[]` in `src/modbus_registers.h`.
A very simple example would be:
```
const modbus_register_t registers[] = {
    { 123, MODBUS_TYPE_HOLDING, REGISTER_TYPE_U16, "value_123" },
    { 124, MODBUS_TYPE_HOLDING, REGISTER_TYPE_U16, "value_124" }
};
```
Where:
 - `123` and `124` are register address to read,
 - `MODBUS_TYPE_HOLDING` is the Modbus object type to read,
 - `REGISTER_TYPE_U16` is the expected format of the returned value,
 - `value_123` and `value_124` are the name in the JSON MQTT message

#### Supported Modbus objects:
 - `HOLDING` type is supported and has been tested
 - `INPUT`, `COIL`, `DISCRETE` and `COUNT` has not been tested but should work

#### Supported returned Value:
 - `REGISTER_TYPE_U16`: unsigned 16-bit integer
 - `REGISTER_TYPE_BITFIELD`: a sequence of 16 (or less) single bits; the first item maps the least significant bit
 - `REGISTER_TYPE_DIEMATIC_ONE_DECIMAL`: a specific De-Dietrich signed decimal implementation
 - `REGISTER_TYPE_DEBUG`: hexadecimal value only visible in INFO logs (not sent in MQTT message)
 - other types are not supported (TODO src/modbus_base.cpp:readModbusRegisterToJson)

## MQTT

MQTT parameters are passed through environment variables:
 - `PIO_MQTT_HOST_IP`: MQTT broker IPv4
 - `PIO_MQTT_PORT`: MQTT broker port
 - `PIO_MQTT_TOPIC`: root prefix of the published topic

With `PIO_MQTT_TOPIC=MyTopic`, based on the register list example above, the published MQTT message will be:
```
Topic: MyTopic/ESP-MM-ABCDEF012345/data
Message: {"value_123":0,"value_124":65536}
```
Where `ABCDEF012345` is the ESP unique Chip ID.

## Compilation

```
git clone https://github.com/gmasse/esp-modbus-mqtt.git
cd esp-modbus-mqtt
python3 -m venv venv
pip install -U platformio
hash -r
cp platformio.ini.dist platformio.ini
(edit platformio.ini if needed)
export PIO_FIRMWARE_URL="http://domain.com/firmware.bin"
export PIO_MQTT_HOST_IP=11.22.33.44
export PIO_MQTT_PORT=1883
export PIO_MQTT_TOPIC=mytopic
platformio run
```

Built firmware will be at `.pio/build/fm-devkit/firmware.bin`
You can upload to ESP with: `platformio run upload`

## TODO

- [ ] Configuration (Wifi credentials) Reset
- [ ] Factory Firmware (https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/api-guides/bootloader.html)
- [ ] Secure Boot
- [ ] Moving to ESP-IDF Framework
- [ ] Log level update at runtime

## FAQ
#### Passing environment variables via VS Code
Edit `.vscode/settings.json` and add the following lines:
```
  "terminal.integrated.env.osx": {
    "PIO_FIRMWARE_URL": "https://url/firmware.bin",
    "PIO_MQTT_HOST_IP": "11.22.33.44",
    "PIO_MQTT_PORT": "1883",
    "PIO_MQTT_TOPIC": "mytopic"
  },
```

#### Flashing firmware
```
cp .plateformio/packages/framework-arduinoespressif32/tools/sdk/bin/bootloader_dio_40m.bin .
cp .platformio/packages/framework-arduinoespressif32/tools/partitions/default.bin .

esptool.py --chip esp32 --port /dev/ttyUSB1 --baud 460800 \
 --before default_reset --after hard_reset write_flash -z \
 --flash_mode dio --flash_freq 40m --flash_size detect \
 0x1000 bootloader_dio_40m.bin 0x8000 default.bin 0x10000 firmware.bin
```
